Proxito: allow custom path prefixes (#10156)
readthedocs/readthedocs.org: readthedocs/proxito/README.rst

   To change the prefix of the subproject itself, use ``custom_prefix`` on the subproject.

Where to define the custom path prefix
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To change the path prefix of a project,
define the prefix in the ``custom_prefix`` attribute of the project itself.
For a translation, change the main language project ``custom_prefix`` attribute.

And to change the prefix of subprojects (``/projects``),
define the prefix in the ``custom_subproject_prefix`` attribute of the super project.

We have validations in place to ensure that the custom prefix is defined in the correct project
(this validations are run when the project is saved from a form or the admin).

Examples
~~~~~~~~

Say we have the following projects:

- docs (main project)
- docs-es (spanish translation of the docs project)
- subproject (subproject of the docs project)
- subproject-es (spanish translation of the subproject project)

They are normally served from:

- docs.rtd.io/en/latest/
- docs.rtd.io/es/latest/
- docs.rtd.io/projects/subproject/en/latest/
- docs.rtd.io/projects/subproject/es/latest/

Then we add a custom path prefix like:

- docs with a custom path prefix of ``/prefix/``

> - docs with a custom subproject path of ``/s/``

Author: Good question, they can overlap, but the path needs to be different from a language if they aren't a single version project, for example:

- /prefix/s/: this is fine, since we can distinguish `/prefix/s/project/en/latest/` from `/prefix/en/latest/`
- /prefix/es/: this isn't okay, since we won't be able to distinguish `/prefix/es/latest/` from `/prefix/es/es/latest/`
- /prefix/foo/es/: this is okay, since `foo` doesn't match a language.

Will update the docs and add some tests about this.

                                    version     |
                                             filename

URL patterns
------------

URL patterns define how docs are served, and how the path is parsed by proxito.

For example, the default paths used are:

- Multi version project: ``/<language>/<version>/<filename>``
- Single version project: ``/<filename>``

> - Subproject: ``/projects/<subproject-alias>/<filename>``

Reviewer: The default for a subproject would include a language & version, right?

```suggestion
- Subproject: ``/projects/<subproject-alias>//<language>/<version>/<filename>``
```

Author: So, here filename will be resolved depending if the subproject is a single version or multi version project, filename is meant to represent any of those patterns.

> URL patterns can be used to change these paths per project, with the following attributes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
URL patterns can be used to change these paths per project, with the following Project model attributes:
```

urlpattern:
   URL pattern to change the path for multi version and single version projects.

urlpattern_subproject:
   URL pattern to change the path up to the subproject alias (the ``/projects`` prefix).

>    To change the pattern of the subproject itself, use ``urlpattern``.

Reviewer: Is this what we're saying? Or will the parent projects urlpattern apply to all subprojects? 

```suggestion
   To change the pattern of the subproject itself, use ``urlpattern`` on the subproject.
```

Author: your suggestion is correct

A URL pattern is a regex with replacement fields,
replacement fields are expanded to define the proper regex and capture groups (components).
Valid replacement fields are: ``language``, ``version``, ``filename``, and ``subproject``.

Where to define the custom URL patterns
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> To change the URL pattern of a project,
> define the custom URL pattern in the ``urlpattern`` attribute of the project itself,
> or if it's a translation, in the main language project.
> 
> And to change the URL pattern of the subproject prefix (``/projects``),
> define the custom URL pattern in the  ``urlpattern_subproject`` attribute of the parent project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To change the URL pattern of a project,
define the custom URL pattern in the ``urlpattern`` attribute of the project itself.
Also:

* For a translation, change the main language project ``urlpattern``.
* For a subproject, change the parent project ``urlpattern``.

And to change the URL pattern of the subproject prefix (``/projects``),
define the custom URL pattern in the  ``urlpattern_subproject`` attribute of the parent project.
```

Writing a custom URL pattern
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. note::

   Custom URL patterns aren't meant to be written by users (yet),

>    a Read the Docs developer needs to do it for the user.

Reviewer: This answers one of my questions 👍 

That seems fine for now.

The simplest way to write a custom URL pattern is to start from the default ones,
and change them as needed.

- Multi version project: ``^/{language}(/({version}(/{filename})?)?)?$``
- Single version project: ``^/{filename}$``
- Subproject: ``^/projects/{subproject}(/{filename})?$``

> A couple of rules to be followed to avoid unexpected behaviours are:

Author: Some of these rules we should be able to automate.

Author: Maybe even just allow `(, ), ?`, since anything else can't be supported.

- Always put the filename at the end of the pattern,
  this is since a filename matches any string.
- Write the regex in a way that a partial match is possible,
  this is useful for raising the proper exception on partial matches
  (like a 404 on an invalid language if the URL starts with one).
- Make the slashes optional (``/``) at the end of each component when possible,
  this is since a URL is still valid if it doesn't end with a slash
  (proxito will redirecte to the path with the slash when appropriate).
- Always end the regex with ``$``, so the whole path is matched,
  not just a part of the path.

> - Starting the regex with ``^`` is optional, since we use ``re.match``.

Reviewer: Seems we just do this automatically, and not have this noted?

- All paths are guaranteed to start with ``/``, so always start the regex with ``/``.
- Don't include named groups, character classes (``[]``),
  or anything that can't be used to reconstruct the URL from the pattern
  using only the version, language, filename, and subproject components.
- Is recomeded to separate each component with ``/``,
  since any other characters can be valid in components (like ``-`` in slugs).
- Remember that this is a regex, so make sure to escape special characters like ``.``.
- Make sure that the patterns from the parent project and the subproject prefix
  don't overlap (``urlpattern`` and ``urlpattern_subproject``).
  We first try to match the path against ``urlpattern`` and then against ``urlpattern_subproject``,
  if they overlap, we won't be able to serve subprojects.

> 

Reviewer: I'm definitely worried about how complex this is. I do think we need some kind of basic test suite or something that runs when we try to set these, otherwise I'm 99% sure we will break things. 

I understand why some of this complexity is needed, but I'd really like to find a way to make it less likely to break.

And to change the URL pattern of the subproject prefix (``/projects``),
define the custom URL pattern in the  ``urlpattern_subproject`` attribute of the super project.

Writing a custom URL pattern
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. note::

   Custom URL patterns aren't meant to be written by users (yet),
   a Read the Docs developer needs to do it for the user.

The simplest way to write a custom URL pattern is to start from the default ones,
and change them as needed.

- Multi version project: ``/{language}(/({version}(/{filename})?)?)?``
- Single version project: ``/{filename}``
- Subproject: ``/projects/{subproject}(/{filename})?``

A couple of rules to be followed to avoid unexpected behaviours are:

- Always put the filename at the end of the pattern,
  this is since a filename matches any string.
- Write the regex in a way that a partial match is possible,
  this is useful for raising the proper exception on partial matches
  (like a 404 on an invalid language if the URL starts with one).
- Make the slashes optional (``/``) at the end of each component when possible,
  this is since a URL is still valid if it doesn't end with a slash

>   (proxito will redirecte to the path with the slash when appropriate).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  (proxito will redirect to the path with the slash when appropriate).
```

                                    version     |
                                             filename

Custom path prefixes
--------------------

By default we serve documentation from the following paths:

- Multi version project: ``/<language>/<version>/<filename>``
- Single version project: ``/<filename>``
- Subproject: ``/projects/<subproject-alias>/<subproject-path>``

Custom path prefixes can be used to change the prefix from where the documentation is served from,
and even change the ``/projects`` prefix for subprojects.
These prefixes can be changed per project, with the following Project model attributes:

custom_prefix:
   Add a prefix for multi version and single version projects.

custom_subproject_prefix:
   Change the ``/projects`` prefix for subprojects.
   To change the prefix of the subproject itself, use ``custom_prefix`` on the subproject.

> 

Reviewer: Is it possible to have a couple examples here to show how to define them?

Author: Added one example at https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/pull/10156/commits/9d860f8caaf61ca7f8a40d23dd496468868197da

The simplest way to write a custom URL pattern is to start from the default ones,
and change them as needed.

> - Multi version project: ``/{language}(/({version}(/{filename})?)?)?``

Reviewer: I still don't quite understand why all the `?`'s are needed at the end here? It seems like we really want to be able to just say `/{language}/{version}/{filename}` right? Is it just to support slash redirects or something?

Author: > I think this is the reason? But it seems like we're adding a lot of complexity in the regex, and I don't quite understand what the value is that we're getting out of it?

We need partial matches to be able to have the correct 404 on a given component, and for redirects, and for when a path doesn't end with `/`.

> Can we post-process /{language}/{version}/{filename} to wrap it in a smart way? to get the regex that's above?

Maybe, it may get tricky when we have things between components `/{language}/something/{version}`, one of the reasons I wanted to avoid using regexes... I can try to see if I can get an algorithm that works reliable adding the groups and `?` where needed.

Reviewer: `/{language}/something/{version}` feels like a pretty odd use for this. 

> We need partial matches to be able to have the correct 404 on a given component, and for redirects, and for when a path doesn't end with /.

I still don't quite understand why that is? Can we not just catch the URL in some kind of `.*` URL handler if the URLConf doesn't match, and still parse it in some smart way? 

I don't want to over-engineer this, so I'm probably OK shipping with what you've built. But I just forsee having issues with these regex's not being properly constructed because of how complex they are to get right..

Author: Since we are using `re.match`, we need one regex that allows us to match

 - /en
 - /en/
 - /en/latest
 - /en/latest/
 - /en/latest/file/name/

And the one for subprojects to match

- /projects/subproject
- /projects/subproject/
- /projects/subproject/file/name/

These are partial matches that we need to archive with just one regex, so the need for groups.

Author: I think I should be able to split each component on `/` or on the end of each `}`, and build a stack that adds the groups with `?`. Going to give it a try.

Author: Implemented this in https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/pull/10156/commits/1ee0bd29cf0180c44d64a7cb62e851b24ef215fd, the algorithm to generate the groups is short, but it may look complex. URL patterns are now simple strings with replacement fields, no more defining of capture groups manually or escaping regex characters, but the complexity was moved to another place, so.

Let me know what you think, if we are good, I can update the proxito docs to match this new implementation, and add some more tests.

Reviewer 2: In another comment I suggested to review what Django is doing to support "path converters" (https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/4.2/topics/http/urls/#path-converters) and, even, try to reuse what they have built already since they provide a way to expand the the converters by creating custom ones.

I think it's a good usage of our time to explore that idea hoping we can reuse their code and simplify ours a lot.

Reviewer 2: >>  We need partial matches to be able to have the correct 404 on a given component, and for redirects, and for when a path doesn't end with /.
> I still don't quite understand why that is? 

This is still unclear to me. What do you mean by "be able to have the correct 404 on a given component"?
